Why aren’t writers applying the “character clause” to Curt Schilling?
Ever since the likes of Barry Bonds, Mark McGwire, Sammy Sosa, Rafael Palmeiro, and other “steroid era” greats have appeared on Hall of Fame ballots, voters have cited the “character clause” as justification for not voting for them. It has seemed that, over the last decade or so, performance enhancing drug use is the only issue for which the “character clause” is invoked. According to a publicly-available collection of current revealed Hall of Fame ballots — curated by Ryan Thibodaux, Adam Dore, John Devivo, and Anthony Calamis — Curt Schilling is currently on track to achieve the necessary 75 percent of the vote to become enshrined in Cooperstown. Only 17.2 percent of the ballots are known, so a lot can happen between now and when the final ballot is counted. As it stands, it’s mystifying that Schilling has so much support from an electorate that has spent much of the past decade wringing hands over PED users and their purported questionable character. Just considering his on-field performance, Schilling was a Hall of Fame talent. He retired with 216 wins, a 3.46 ERA, and 3,116 strikeouts. Baseball Reference credits him with 80.6 Wins Above Replacement over his career. He made the All-Star team six times, had three runner-up finishes in Cy Young voting, won a World Series ring three times, and won both an NLCS MVP Award and World Series MVP Award. Schilling is one of only 16 pitchers in the 3,000-strikeout club. As his awards illustrate, he was incredible in the postseason, boasting a 2.23 ERA with 120 strikeouts and 25 walks across 133 1/3 innings. Of his 19 postseason starts, Schilling reached at least the sixth inning in 17 of them and allowed two or fewer runs in 15 of them. Had Schilling simply galloped off into the sunset when his playing career was over, there would be no debate about his candidacy. But in the time since he’s retired, Schilling has become very vocal about political issues both relating to and not relating to baseball. Once a broadcaster for ESPN, Schilling lost his job after sharing a meme on Facebook expressing anti-transgender sentiment. He later doubled down in a blog post. He compared Muslims to Nazis. Schilling also tweeted his support of violence against journalists, writing, “Ok, so much awesome here…” on top of an image of a man wearing a shirt which read, “Rope. Tree. Journalist. Some assembly required.” If nothing else, the anti-journalist sentiment should have hit home for voters since they themselves are journalists. (That this in particular, and not everything taken together, would be the thing that hits home illustrates why we need a more diverse electorate.) The idea that the media is to be distrusted and punished has been spread far and wide over the past two years, helping to result in the United States’ addition to the most dangerous countries for journalists for the first time, per NBC News. These aren’t just jokes — as Schilling claimed — when one has a sizable platform, as he does. Schilling has over 240,000 Twitter followers and hosts a podcast for Breitbart. Is this really someone Major League Baseball would want to honor and forever enshrine? The Hall of Fame describes the criterion voters use in consideration of players on the ballot: “Voting shall be based upon the player’s record, playing ability, integrity, sportsmanship, character and contribution to the team(s) on which the player played.” Moral issues are difficult to quantify, but most reasonable people would agree that using performance-enhancing drugs falls much further down on the list of offenses than transphobia, Islamophobia, general xenophobia, and supporting violence against journalists. That baseball journalists willingly overlook Schilling’s character is disheartening. Baseball writing is an industry that should and commonly does ask for better from the players (and managers and coaches and other writers). Schilling’s vote percentages, starting from the time he became eligible (2013) to last year, have been: 38.8, 29.2, 39.2, 52.3, 45, and 51.2. More than likely, Schilling will not reach the necessary 75 percent and he’ll be shut out of the Hall of Fame for another year. But even if his vote total comes in around 50 percent, as it has the past three years, that’s still way too much support and it reflects badly on the electorate. That is especially true considering writers every year have complained about a “crowded” ballot and being limited to only 10 votes per ballot. Some deserving players on the cusp, like Edgar Martínez and Mike Mussina, would really benefit from writers ceasing to vote for a former player with lacking character.


?New Self-help Book Describes what Character is all About 
Jim Boeglin believes that there is a great need for persons of character in the world of politics, government, business, religion and everyday society, so he penned “Character Building: The ABCs of Building Depth and Strength of Character” (published by Archway Publishing). In it, Boeglin uses the alphabet to share important lessons in building depth and strength of character in the second book of The Bike Writer trilogy. “Character Building” is an attempt to define the basic ingredients of a strong person of character, as well as those characteristics that have a detrimental impact on a person's level of character. Boeglin upholds the notion that being a person of character is an essential ingredient for a life well lived. “The importance of leaders with integrity and honesty has never been more obvious,” Boeglin expresses. “Raising the awareness of the lack of character is an essential step in restoring character among our leaders.” The book contains a collection of essays about qualities that build character, as well as those that undermine it. It is especially intended for anyone seeking to learn profound lessons on life. “Character Building” is available for purchase at: https://www.amazon.com/Character-Building-Abcs-Depth-Strength-ebook/dp/B07D73LDK8. An excerpt from the book reads: Character is the sum total of our personalities. It is made up of many building blocks, some of which are explored in this book. A few people seem to have an innate sense of character that is genetic. For most people, however, character is an acquired trait. It is a result of a continuing effort to do the right thing, choosing thoughts and actions that are strong, confident, brave, kind, loving, helpful and positive. We are free to choose our thoughts and thereby mold our character. “Character Building” By Jim Boeglin Hardcover | 5.5x8.5 in | 160 pages | ISBN 9781480862128 Softcover | 5.5x8.5 in | 160 pages | ISBN 9781480862135 E-Book | 160 pages | ISBN 9781480862142 Available at Amazon and Barnes &amp; Noble About the Author Jim Boeglin is a retired Hoosier attorney currently residing in Bonita Springs with his wife, Jan. Together they formed The Boeglin Team, a group of residential realtors working with Royal Shell Real Estate in the Bonita, Estero and Naples markets. Boeglin is an avid biker, traveling in excess of 6,000 miles each year. When he is not writing, biking or selling real estate, he plays golf at the Estero Country Club. He is also the author of “The Bike Writer: Insights Discovered along the Bicycle Paths of Life. Simon &amp; Schuster, a company with nearly ninety years of publishing experience, has teamed up with Author Solutions, LLC, the leading self-publishing company worldwide, to create Archway Publishing. With unique resources to support books of all kind, Archway Publishing offers a specialized approach to help every author reach his or her desired audience. For more information, visit archwaypublishing.com or call 888-242-5904. Related Articles View More Books Stories More Hot Stories For You


?‘Batgirl’ Writer Promises Wonderful And Weird Characters 
In a recent interview, Christina Hodson, writer of Suicide Squad spin-off Birds of Prey, promised that the characters in her next DC project, Batgirl, would be wonderful and weird. During the interview, Hodson was talking about her work on the upcoming Birds of Prey film and how its rather unconventional title came about. Eventually they began to talk about her work on the upcoming Batgirl film. According to Hodson, she did not feel constrained in anyway with her writing duties on the character. If anything, the studio was being very supportive of her and previous versions of the character have not weighed on her at all: I actually don’t think it is that established. A few people remember Alicia Silverstone doing that, but that movie was not one that is seminal. So, I do feel very free doing that one, and the studio is being super supportive, in letting me dream up whatever I want to dream up. She then gave the readers a bit of a hint as to what the characters in the upcoming Batgirl film would be like and what excites her the most about working on the character: Many things, but I’m not allowed to talk about that, at all. She’s cool. With all of these characters – the ones that I’m creating and that are original, like Charlie, and the ones I’m getting to inherit and play with – they’re independent, intelligent, capable, interesting and nuanced, and nuanced really is the main thing. They’re not one thing or another. They are flawed, complex, beautiful, wonderful, weird, and fully rounded and fully fleshed out characters. We’ve got so many great actresses out there, that are ready to play these roles, that it’s fun to be writing roles for them. From the sound of things, Christina Hodson is fully committed to these characters and seeing them come to life. Originally Avengers director and Justice League co-director, Joss Whedon was set to write and direct the Batgirl film but eventually left the project. His official reason for leaving was that he simply did not have a story to tell. Hodson eventually took over the project and, from the look of things, it is moving on quite nicely. What do you all make of Hodson’s comments? Are you eager to see a Batgirl film hit theaters soon? Would you prefer seeing Batman get his first solo film before this happens? Let us know what you think in the comments below!Cathy Yan (Dead Pigs) is set to direct Hodson’s Birds of Prey script. The film is being produced by Sue Kroll under her Kroll &amp; Co Entertainment banner along with Clubhouse Pictures’ Bryan Unkeless, and Margot Robbie. Birds of Prey hits theaters on February 7, 2020. Stay tuned to Heroic Hollywood for the latest news on Birds of Prey and the future of DC Films as we learn it. Source: Collider ‘Titans’ Batmobile Concept Art Reveals Different Takes On Batman’s Iconic Vehicle Following its brief appearance in last week’s episode, concept art for Titans’ Batmobile has been released and reveals different takes on Batman’s iconic vehicle. The latest episode of Titans revealed a brief first look at a new version of the Batmobile while Dick Grayson is in the Batcave via flashback. The final version of the Batmobile in the Titans universe appears to be inspired by Batman 89 and The Animated Series. Concept art has been released and the initial designs were seemingly inspired by many past versions of the Batmobile across different mediums. You can check out the concept art below: Do you like the look of the Batmobile in Titans? Which concept art version is your favorite? Comment below! The series continues this week with the episode titled “Asylum” and you can read the official synopsis below! When The Messenger (recurring guest star REED BIRNEY) reveals that Rachel’s birth mother is alive and being held captive by The Organization in a mysterious psychiatric facility, Rachel is determined to rescue her. But once inside, the Titans are faced with their deepest vulnerabilities and fears. Guest Cast: Rachel Nichols as Angela, Reed Birney as The Messenger and Rachel Crawford as Doctor. The series stars Brenton Thwaites as Richard “Dick” Grayson / Robin, Anna Diop as Koriand’r / Starfire, Teagan Croft as Rachel Roth / Raven, and Ryan Potter as Garfield “Gar” Logan / Beast Boy. Titans is now available exclusively on DC Universe.

What I learned writing 750 words of fiction every day for 100 days
Credit: Neil Slorance The goal of The 100 Day Project is to commit to one creative action for 100 days and to create/post every day on Instagram with your own unique project hashtag. When I did this last in 2015, I wrote 750 words every day for 100 days. My goal was just to write more, and that ended up taking the form of free writing against random prompts I found on the internet or came up with myself. This year, I set myself a similar goal, now knowing that I am capable of following through on something for 100 days. But this time, I wanted to focus on writing fiction. As many do, I first fell into writing by falling in love with fiction. As a kid, I wrote and illustrated my own stories ferociously, like “Being Smart,” a story about a girl who is bullied for being smart, has a bad dream about it, and then tells the teacher the next day to take care of it. (What a snitch.) In eighth grade, I even co-wrote 100+ pages of what was supposed to be the first in a trilogy of horrible teen novels a la The Clique and Gossip Girl which my friend and I named ~The Intangible Series~. I hope that the manuscript is lost to the bowels of Gmail forever. But as I grew older, I stopped writing fiction. I got more self-conscious about my imagination (and myself), and in college, I discovered creative nonfiction and personal essays. I narrowly applied for a creative nonfiction writing major in sophomore year, but then decided against it because I felt like I’d run out of ideas and life experience to write about in my intro classes. And now, all these years later, I found myself wanting to dive back into fiction. There and back again. So for this year’s 100 Day Project, I decided to write 750 words every day, but in an attempt to make things easier on myself, I decided it would be fiction inspired by and/or tangentially related to my life— a bridge between the nonfiction that I’m used to writing and the fiction that I haven’t written in awhile. Thus began #100daysofmylifeasfiction, where most entries were completely fictional with just the germ of the idea coming from something I saw, read, or thought about that day, while others were, quite literally, what my life that day would’ve read like if it was like fiction. How I wrote 750 words of fiction every day for 100 days Over the course of 100 days, I’ve written 90,946 words. Instagram excerpts from The 100 Day Project I wrote almost every day?—?and almost always procrastinated until the end of the day to write. (As a result, I was severely sleep-deficient throughout this entire project.) I never let myself get more than five days behind, and that was usually because of travel. If I did get behind, I caught up by writing two entries per day until I was back on track, sometimes planning out longer pieces to help with continuity and motivation. I wrote each entry in iA Writer, chose an excerpt to screenshot which I then cropped in Photoshop, and finally posted to Instagram with that day’s title and the relevant hashtags. Coming up with ideas After going to an ideas workshop this past year hosted by ann friedman and Jade Chang, I started “composting,” a technique to track things that you’re curious about. I started keeping a continuous, unorganized braindump of quotes from pieces I was reading, links to articles I found intriguing, funny tweets, kernels of ideas I wanted to explore, weird facts I learned from podcasts, conversations I overheard on the subway, or moods I wanted to capture. It allowed me to come back and identify patterns and topics I found interesting and provided a starting point for how to knit those topics together. Most days, I would go to the compost to get inspired. Inspiration doesn’t strike, it is a practice. Ideation is collection, development, and synthesis, the linking and combination of various strands in unique ways. Experimentation I used each day to try out different formats, voices, and styles. In 100 days, I explored 84 different ideas (as some entries spanned multiple days). Of those 84 entries, I wrote 54 in the present tense and 30 in the past tense. I wrote 74 entries in third person, 9 in first person, and only 1 in second person. I wrote one story as a series of Yelp reviews about the same restaurant, another as an RSVP to a wedding. I wrote in different perspectives and degrees of narrative omniscience. I experimented with genre?—?romance, sci-fi, fantasy, mystery. Some days, I focused on character sketches or world-building, and other days I attempted to write complete stories. The best part about The 100 Day Project was that there wasn’t any time for excuses or self-doubt. There would always be tomorrow to try again. Writing as a daily practice meant I cared less if it was bad. In fact, it helped me learn to not be afraid to write bad things. It was a way to develop my own voice, to see what I liked writing about, what felt challenging but necessary to write, and what resonated with people. Actually doing the thing Even though I procrastinated a lot, at the end of the day (erm, technically 1am the next day?), I always forced myself to sit at my desk and write at least 750 words in one go. I would sometimes scribble an outline in a few bullet points, but more often than not, I just started to write the first thing that popped into my head to get the creative juices flowing. Some days it was like pulling teeth, where every word felt like a struggle. Other days, it started off rocky, but then the words and scenes started to come more naturally. I even realized that some of my favorite pieces were the ones I wrote at 2am when I really didn’t feel like it, and had it not been for this project, I never would’ve written them otherwise. I always romanticized the act of writing?—?a stroke of genius, a furious impulse to write, followed by a torrent of words. But I couldn’t cut corners and just arrive at the perfect sentence or paragraph or story on the first try. Writing is a craft, and every craft requires discipline and practice. What I learnedInstagram is terrible for writing Instagram is a very visual medium, and writing is not. (Maybe this was a lesson I should’ve learned the last time I did this project.) Besides the fact that the font size I chose was physically hard to read, it was also difficult to capture subtlety and nuance well on Instagram. Sometimes the things I was most proud of couldn’t be captured in an excerpt, like a character’s progress, mirroring and framing devices, or the effect of repetition throughout a piece. I think it would’ve been different if my project was writing exclusively micro/flash fiction (usually &lt; 300 words), something along the lines of Very Short Story, which has different challenges due to its constraints. But what I wrote each day was always more than what a square frame could contain. Plus, I did not want to be the Rupi Kaur of micro/flash fiction. Back to basics The biggest thing that this project got me doing was asking basic questions again. What do characters want? What gets in their way? What memorable action is there? I thought about discrete storytelling elements?—?plot, theme, characterization, setting, dialogue —and how many elements you could develop at a time. Reading has also helped inform my writing. I have continued my other ongoing numbered project of reading 52 books in 52 weeks, which has included many excellent novels, but I’ve also read more short stories by authors like Carmen Maria Machado, Curtis Sittenfeld, and Jenny Zhang. Studying what I admire or what works within other short stories has helped me focus on areas I can improve in my own work: a plot twist, execution of a high-concept idea, pacing, the combination of unexpected themes, etc. Process process process During the ideas workshop I went to with Ann Friedman and Jade Chang, they said that everyone thinks there are two types of people in this world: people who do things and people who don’t do things. In reality, they said that the two types of people in this world are people who do things and people who talk about doing things. (I felt both attacked and seen.) This project got me to stop talking about writing and actually start writing. Some ideas seemed ambitious and amazing in my head, but they didn’t work as well once I actually wrote them down. Other times, a story that seemed very boring and lame actually had something interesting that was worth exploring once I got things out of my head and into words. Overall, I got better at getting to the “actualization” step of ideas. After all, it’s difficult to assess an idea or a story until you have something concrete to work with. In April, just a few days into the project, I attended a reading and signing for Pachinko. The author, Min Jin Lee, advised prospective writers to “go for broke and just have fun,” to write a few drafts and then give yourself as much space as possible before editing. “Get out of the way of the story,” she advised. Each day, I tried not to edit as I was writing (easier said than done), to get out of my own way, and instead to just have fun. A simple recounting did not convince. The plot I needed would have to work in this other way, out of a sense of what would happen to someone like me in this situation, not what did happen or had happened to me.— Alexander Chee, How to Write an Autobiographical Novel I’ve always been tripped up by the advice to “write what you know,” which is why I positioned my project as pseudo-inspired by things in my own life. I thought that I would fall back most days to writing about my boring life in the third-person, but I found myself rarely doing that. Instead, I got into the habit of taking something that I’d read or something that happened to me that day and twisting it, considering the different outcomes or angles, how different situations would’ve played out from different perspectives. Nuggets of truth with embellishment. Fiction gave me distance to write about aspects of my life in ways that were actually quite unrelated to my life at all. If I wanted to explore my experience living overseas in an expat bubble in Beijing, I imagined what the first day of school would be like for a character at an international school. If I wanted to describe my experience meeting another Nicole Zhu through LinkedIn, I imagined someone who kept tabs on all of her internet doppelgängers. If I wanted to capture the embarrassment of fumbling and stumbling over your mother tongue, I imagined a Chinese American woman faced with the task of translating her wedding vows into Chinese. I started to ask “what if?” rather than trying to capture “what happened.” And that was where I found the stories I was most excited to write. What’s next? Editing!!! Of the 84 discrete story ideas I explored, there are only ~15 that I am interested in revisiting or expanding upon. I have a handful of drafts I’d like to finish and workshop. Now that I’m slowly getting over my fear of putting pen to paper for first drafts, I can work on the next (and much harder) part of writing: revising. I also want to keep up the momentum and continue writing regularly. To hold myself accountable, and because public accountability is one of my most effective motivators, I am starting a newsletter called GET LIT (sorry, I’m a shitty millennial who loves puns), where I will be sharing full-length stories I write every week. Sign up now!


?‘Worldbuilding’ — Elements of story writing 
As a child, I liked to lose myself in the process of weaving stories. This habit has never left me; instead, I’ve now extended my love for stories by churning out 50,000 word manuscripts and piecing together anthologies of my favorite flash fiction excerpts. My stories usually involve some combination of spaceships, fairies, talking roses, sarcastic wolves, and vengeful queens. Unfortunately, it’s often difficult for me to keep track of all my story elements at once, and at the worst of times my fantasy plotlines dissolve into a tangled mess. I can barely manage to extricate myself from the situation. My protagonist? Not so much. I have piles of discarded main characters and antagonists and villains. They all fell victim to the same travesty of literature that is poor “worldbuilding.” Worldbuilding is the process of creating fantasy or science fiction settings with systems of governance, infrastructure, landscape features, and societal norms, much like we have on Earth. We can also consider worldbuilding to be important on a smaller scale, since it helps writers to synthesize details about characters’ individual lives. Overall, worldbuilding helps writers to tie plotlines together and improve the coherence of their stories. To improve my own worldbuilding skills, as well as those of other writers, I’ve decided to compile a list of six central elements we should pay attention to in the process of creating believable, engaging fictional universes. Since my first move when writing a story is to find names for my characters, that’s the first part of my list. Create meaningful names: Nothing gives me more frustration than reading a fantasy book in which every character’s name sounds like two disparate syllables arbitrarily tossed together. I know you’ve come across these names before, and they look as if they’ve been created using an online “fantasy name” generator. In order to avoid this pitfall, I like to blend names from various geographic locales in my writing. Sometimes this means browsing lists of Scandinavian names and combining them with syllables from South Asia; other times, it means naming characters after forests or stars. In my experience, the best authors enhance their stories by building on a variety of elements from existing worlds, so that the reader is both pulled in by familiarity and captivated by the novelty of fantasy universes: Think “The Lunar Chronicles” or “Enna Burning.” Names are an essential part of setting the mood of a story. Find inspiration: My inspiration for worldbuilding usually comes from artwork. Sometimes it’s my own artwork and sometimes I get it from other people’s. Even browsing HD wallpaper websites can serve as an inspiration for stories, since many graphic designers are good at creating awe-inspiring scenery that can help a writer envision a physical setting for their characters. Artwork also serves as a conceptual basis for much of my writing. For example, this is a recent artistic work-in-progress of mine, titled “Constellations.” When I look at it, it raises a variety of questions, leading me to envision a story set in outer space, perhaps incorporating dreams as a central element. Establish proper infrastructure: As enticing as it may seem to launch into a story’s fast-paced action scenes without considering anything else, that’s a surefire way to end up with plot holes. Fantasy societies must have a way to perform basic functions. What type of society does your main character belong to? What kind of governing system do they have? Do they go to school? If so, is it like Peninsula High, where they learn multivariable calculus and quantum physics, or do they take invisibility lessons and carry out dragon-fighting training sessions? If you’re writing a fantasy story, these are the types of questions you have to answer. Language, clothing, and culture: A fantasy story is intended to encapsulate multiple aspects of the author’s imagined world, and is multifaceted. Consider the intricacies of your characters’ language (if they have one). Think about what kind of clothes they wear. Do cultural superstitions play a part in their lives? (There are entire novels built characters’ belief in fortune-telling, for instance). Do they have cultural festivals every year? (One example of this is cultural festivals in Gaelic fairy mythology, such as Samhain. I’ve seen these incorporated into several novels.) Aspects of the setting, such as the characters’ languages and perceptions of the world, can be established through sensory description and detailed imagery. Juxtaposition: At heart, almost every story is about the struggle between good and evil. But writers have to think about other ways they can establish contrasts in their work: poverty vs. greed, creation vs. destruction. Although fantasy literature is supposed to be imaginary, it’s simultaneously familiar to us because it emphasizes themes that we can all understand. Good writing combines well-known issues and juxtaposes them with made-up worlds. Some examples of this are “WondLa” (nature vs. technological progress and Uglies (shallow beauty vs. character). Leadership and organization: Many dystopian/fantasy-kingdom novels (think The Hunger Games and Divergent) focus on the protagonist’s quest to overturn the oppressive reign of a central government authority. While this plotline is frequently seen as cliché, common dystopian tropes are attractive to readers for a good reason: They reflect conflicts and tensions common to humanity such as power, authority, and rebellion. It’s simply a matter of pulling them off correctly. To establish a strong basis for this type of plotline, authority figures in a story should have motivations for their behavior. Even fantasy societies should have multifaceted systems of governance whose leaders display believable motivations for their actions. Worldbuilding is an essential component of crafting an engaging story. As a writer, I’ve made the resolution to improve the quality of my work by creating believable, grounded worlds that draw upon elements common to the human experience.

Arthur Krystal Revives The Genre Fiction v. Literature Debate 
The debate over whether genre fiction can ever count as literature is back, this time in the form of an essay from Arthur Krystal at the New Yorker. I don’t much agree with the piece, because I think it’s totally ludicrous to say that “Writers who want to understand why the heart has reasons that reason cannot know are not going to write horror tales or police procedurals. Why say otherwise?” when environments of stress, grief, or transitions between old worlds and new ones are precisely those that expose the reasons that reasons cannot know. But I actually think it’s a great example of the dodge people like Krystal perform to justify treating genre as lesser than an amorphously-defined “literature.” He writes: The science-fiction writer Ursula K. Le Guin, for instance, announced that literature “is the extant body of written art. All novels belong to it.” Is that so? A novel by definition is “written art”? You know, I wrote a novel once, and I’m pretty sure that Le Guin would change her mind if she read it… What I’m trying to say is that “genre” is not a bad word, although perhaps the better word for novels that taxonomically register as genre is simply “commercial.” Born to sell, these novels stick to the trite-and-true, relying on stock characters whose thoughts spool out in Lifetime platitudes. There will be exceptions, as there are in every field, but, for the most part, the standard genre or commercial novel isn’t going to break the sea frozen inside us. If this sounds condescending, so be it. Commercial novels, in general, whether they’re thrillers or romance or science fiction, employ language that is at best undistinguished and at worst characterized by a jejune mentality and a tendency to state the obvious. Which is not to say that some literary novels, as more than a few readers pointed out to me, do not contain a surfeit of decorative description, elaborate psychologizing, and gleams of self-conscious irony. To which I say: so what? What he’s doing here is clever: essentially, Krystal is holding genre responsible for the worst stuff written in its name, while literature doesn’t have to be responsible for, say, romance novels, or Nicholas Sparks weepies. Genre is determined to be genre because it includes certain kinds of plots or takes place in certain kinds of settings. Literature is a determination of quality. Treating them as if they’re similar categories for sorting out novels, film, or television is a brilliant dodge on the part of people who don’t want to recognize that genre fiction can be literature. Why they’re resistant to that recognition is the really interesting question.


?12 Lessons on Writing by Stephen King 
#1: Write for Yourself First“When you’re writing a story, you’re telling yourself a story. When you rewrite, you’re taking out all the things that are not the story.” Write with the door closed, rewrite with the door open. Stephen actually learned this lesson himself from his boss and editor John Gould at his job writing for Lisbon’s Weekly Newspaper. Don’t let anyone or anything interfere while you first channel and write down your story. Let it come to you on its own without judgment, without even looking through a particular lens. Be objective. Then, when you’ve finished the first draft of any story, it’s time to put on some different glasses and rewrite with an open mind. #2: Write Every Day“Once I start work on a project, I don’t stop and I don’t slow down unless I absolutely have to. If I don’t write every day, the characters begin to stale off in my mind?—?they begin to seemlike characters instead of real people. The tale’s narrative cutting edge starts to rust and I begin to lose my hold on the story’s plot and pace.” This has proven to be one of the most important pieces of advice I ever received. I knew about this before I read the book, but this time it felt more pressing. Reading this book came at the right moment for me (as usual). I’m working on a novel and I aim to write on it every day. A few weeks ago I was doing volunteer work with mentally challenged kids and during that week I didn’t write. Stephen King was right. I lost grip on my story, on my characters. Another thing I noticed was doubt creeping in. On the other hand, when I got back, it was also a great moment to have an in-depth look at what it was exactly what I was aiming for. So, I decided to implement a structure week. Re-reading, working out details about the world my characters live in, plot, structure, the things I want to say. It proved to be a blessing in disguise. Now, I’m back on track, but it did cost me a more than a week to get back into the flow. #3: Let go of Your Fear to Impress“Good writing is often about letting go of fear and affectation, Affectation itself, beginning with the need to define some sort of writing as ‘good’ and other sorts as ‘bad’, is fearful behavior. Good writing is also about making good choices when it comes to picking the tools you plan to work with.” Fear is at the root of most bad writing. Readers are smarter than you think, don’t over-explain out of fear of misunderstanding. #4: Do“The hours we spend talking about writing is time we don’t spend actually doing it.” I couldn’t have said it any clearer. Go. Leave this article now (if you must ;)). Write! Thinking about writing. Reading about writing. Before you know it you’ve cleaned your kitchen (while thinking about writing). Procrastination happens to the best of us. Even when I face the black page with a blinking cursor, every inch of me sometimes thinks of something else I could do. But once I’ve written down the first few words, and crossed the fearful threshold, I enter a different kind of zone. It’s not entirely comfortable, but it’s fascinating and I usually don’t want to leave. #5: Read“If you don’t have time to read, you don’t have the time (or tools) to write.” There are so many reasons why reading is good in order for you to become better at your craft. Reading can be purely entertainment, or to quench your thirst for knowledge. When you write fiction, you can study the greats. Learn from others. Learn how to describe, build the plot, build a character. Recognize patterns, study the tone of voice and pace. Steal and make it your own. Usually, when I’m reading a book in a genre similar to what I’m writing at the moment, I feel extra inspired. Especially when I read just before I start writing. #6: Write a ‘Crammy’ First Draft“Write with the door closed, rewrite with the door open.” King is very structural when it comes to writing. His schedule is brutal. But hey, you don’t become Stephen King by slacking. He sets himself the goal of writing 2,000 words a day. Every day. That way, he argues, he can finish a 180,000-word book in three months. Just by cramming the story on the pages. Without judgment, with the door closed, only writing for himself. These goals are ambitious, and for me not manageable. I’m no full-time writer. But I do love his habitual and structural sense. Therefore, I aim to write 1,000 words a day (in the morning when I wake up, before work) only on my novel. I’m satisfied with 500. This way, I might be able to finish the first draft in six months’ time. And boy will it be shitty. Not necessarily the story or the idea. Coherence would be an issue, grammar surely too, rusty dialogue, consistency, etc. But that’s ok. The words are out! I’m writing, not doubting. I can rearrange, rewrite and polish later. #7: Accept Your Vocabulary Level“When it comes to a writing tool such as vocabulary, pack what you have without the slightest bit of guilt and feeling of inferiority.” English is my second language and although I’ve been studying it for years, I’m still not a native speaker. And that’s ok. Don’t try to polish your vocabulary too extremely, don’t overreach. Use your own voice. “Use the first word that comes to your mind, if it is appropriate and colorful.” #8 Create a Good Writing Environment“Eliminate every possible distraction.” Set up your writing space where you can receive your inspiration every time you sit down. King is an advocate for creating your own writing sanctuary. A place where you will always write. Ideally in one location. There should be no distractions like your phone, a TV, video games. Close the curtains. Write at the same time in the same place every day. Make it a habit. For me, this is difficult because I work too, and sometimes I’m on the road, I write everywhere. On the train, in a coffee shop (no not those, even though I’m from Amsterdam), on a terrace, at my desk, on the couch. I’m quite flexible because I have to be. However, every morning when I wake up I sit at my desk (when I’m home at least) and write. #9: Be Yourself“Write what you like, then imbue it with life and make it unique by blending in your own personal knowledge of life, friendship, relationships, sex and work.” What you know makes you unique. Be brave enough to be yourself in your writing. It will resonate the most, it comes natural, and it can even be therapeutic in my opinion. Chances are you begin by writing what you love to read. Go from there and explore. #10: Show, Don’t Tell“Description begins in the writer’s imagination, but should finish in the reader’s.” As a writer it is essential you’re good at describing characters, scenery, objects, situations, you name it. King believes that good description consists of a few well-chosen details, that’ll stand for everything. Don’t overdo it. Leave some to the imagination as well. That way you leave room for the reader to fill in the rest. If you read a lot of fiction yourself, analyze how other writers describe things. What do you like? What don’t you like? The best lessons are in reading other people’s work. Good description starts with seeing things clearly as a writer and then to put it on the page in an equally clear manner. And the most important thing is: you must show it, don’t tell. #11: Take Some Distance Before You Edit“When you write a book, you spend day after day scanning and identifying trees. When you’re done, you have to step back and look at the forest.” What did you write, what did you try to convey? What’s your book really about? Let the book rest for a bit, take your mind off of it. (King recommends at least 6 weeks). Then, when you rewrite and work on your second draft make it even more clear what it is your book is about.#12: Advice on the Editing Process“For me the answer has always been two drafts and a polish.” When you’ve finished your first draft and let some time pass, go back to it. Now it’s time to work on your second draft. Stephen King asks himself the following questions: Is this story coherent? What are the recurring elements? Do they form a theme? What is it all about? Formula: Second draft = First draft?—?10%. Gulp. Time to kill your darlings. Make the cuts, answer your questions, take out mistakes, and then polish. When you’ve applied the polish, it’s time to open the door and show your work to people close to you (about 5) and who are willing to give feedback.


?Literary Fiction is a Genre: A List 
A few weeks ago, whenever I told anyone I was reading Molly Ringwald’s novel-in-stories When it Happens to You, they either said, “Wow, cool!” or, “Ugh. Why?” To the latter, I replied, “Why not?” Ringwald has always presented herself as well-spoken and well-read, and being an actress isn’t necessarily a detriment to writing: after all, actors, like fiction writers, must inhabit characters and seek out a scene’s power. (And, dude, if you were in Pretty in Pink, you’re basically qualified to win a Nobel.) I devoured When it Happens to You in a day or two. It was an engaging and pleasing read, with lines like, “Greta had always been most beautiful to him when emerging from water. Swimming pools, oceans, bath tubs.” Ringwald treats her characters with compassion, and I enjoyed seeing how each story would connect to the next. Overall, though, I was underwhelmed, perhaps because the territory mined is so familiar: there’s an affair, there are blah sentences like, “The color had drained from her face.” There’s even a description of a woman who, after almost being run over, raises “a furious fist” at the driver, like some irate extra in an action flick’s chase sequence. I longed for a more daring and complicated book; Ringwald has one in her future, I know it, but this isn’t it. Even so, as I said, I devoured the novel, and, in general, enjoyed it. Its predictable content and structure were comforting, like a catchy pop song or a romantic comedy. You know, as Adorno might say, its familiarity helped me ward off death. Or something. In a recent profile of Justin Cronin in the New York Times Magazine, Colson Whitehead is quoted as saying he’d “rather shoot [him]self in the face” than have another discussion about literature genres. I don’t blame him. When people ask me what kind of fiction I write, I usually say, “It’s about people,” and leave it at that. But as I read Ringwald’s book, I found myself pondering literary fiction: as a genre, as a taxonomical category. When It Happens to You, you see, is a sterling example of literary fiction, if we were to consider literary fiction as a straightforward genre like romance or science fiction, with certain expected tropes and motifs. What, you ask, are some attributes of this genre? Read on, my friend, read on. 1. The Long Title When it Happens to You is not only a long title, it’s also in the second person, as are many titles in the literary fiction category. I think we should blame Dave Eggers for starting this trend with his novel You Shall Know Our Velocity. Or maybe Miranda July‘s story collection, No One Belongs Here More Than You, really got things going. I, too, am guilty of joining the bandwagon with my hard-to-say novella title, If You’re Not Yet Like Me. Uwem Akpan demanded us to Say You’re One Of Them, and Elliott Holt will comply with her forthcoming  You Are One Of Them.  Ramona Ausubel’s debut,  No One Is Here Except All of Us, switched things up with the first-person plural; perhaps she was inspired by fellow UC Irvine alumnus Joshua Ferris’s Then We Came to the End. If Ringwald hadn’t chosen the long second-person title, she might have picked one with a full name, a la, The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao by Junot Diaz, or Billy Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk by Ben Fountain, or The Flight of Gemma Hardy by Margot Livesey, or Laura Lamont’s Life In Pictures by Emma Straub. Sheesh. I should call my next book And So Olivo D’Havellind and You Will Move Away From this Place I Call Home. It’s sure to win the Pulitzer. 2. Adultery A decade later, Sean Carman’s “Lessons Learned from My Study of Literature” still makes me laugh. But the third lesson, “The thing about adultery is it’s the highest expression of pure human freedom,” has its inverse as well: that adultery in literary fiction (and in real life, too, I presume) also leads to stress, despair, and a complicated regret. Let’s just go ahead and credit Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina for making extra-marital affairs in fiction so popular. Anton Chekhov also gets points for his enormously influential story, “The Lady with The Lap Dog.” And all contemporary tales of domestic unrest must also pay dues to Richard Yates’s Revolutionary Road, with its depiction of The Wheelers, an unhappy, unfaithful couple living in the suburbs. If you aren’t sure what kind of literary novel to write, I suggest starting with an English professor who has an affair with his (her?!) student while the wife (husband?! life partner?!) sculpts and flails at home. Abortion plot-line optional. 3. Scene, Exposition, Scene, Flashback, Scene, Cue Epiphany The reader of literary genre fiction should feel the structure in her body, particularly with short stories. It’s a recognizable rhythm, it’s a shimmering in one’s veins as one moves from opening scene to well-placed background information to the next, more tense scene to that special, oh-so-revealing flashback about the time our protagonist ran over his rubber horse, or the time he knew he was in love with a real horse, or the time he — oh you see what I mean. In the genre of literary fiction, this structure must lead to a moment of revelation, suggested but never explained. The image of our protagonist in a Safeway parking lot, pushing his cart as if he were a cowboy riding a horse, the wind roughing up his hair, the distant neighs of horns in the far off distance. (Can you feel it? I can.) Let’s go ahead and give James Joyce his rightful due for such faintly falling, falling faintly moments of reverie and character change in literary fiction. (Damn that horse! Now I’m sobbing!) 4. A Dog barks, someone eats a watermelon, a car drives away. In his terrific and funny Slate essay, Rosecrans Baldwin unveils how many authors write barking dogs into the backgrounds of their novels. Though he points out barking dogs in genre novels as well, I’d argue that you find them in literary fiction precisely because they show time passing. As Baldwin says, “Most authors…employ the trope as a narrative rest stop, an innocuous way to fill space and time.” In literary fiction, there is so little event, authors need that dang dog; without it, there’s only the mind, there’s only emotion, and the reader is floating in a vacuum. As James Wood has said of the aforementioned  “The Lady With the Lap Dog,” Chekhov needs Gurov to eat a watermelon for half an hour in front of his new mistress in order to show time passing. Otherwise, nada is happening! For good measure, I suggest adding to your scene a car driving away. Or even better, the distant rumble of a motorcycle. Ooh. Yes. 5. The plate drops! Years ago, Maud Newton lodged the phrase “tea towel fiction” in my brain, and it’s stuck with me. Newton quotes a judge for the Orange Prize, Katharine Viner, who said of the many submissions she read: They are books with 500 pages discussing a subtle but allegedly profound shift within a relationship. They are books where intricate descriptions of a man taking a glass out of the dishwasher, taking a tea-towel off a rail, opening out the tea-towel, then delicately drying the glass with the tea-towel, before pouring a drink into the glass, signify that he has just been through a divorce. This is a “nothing happens” book, the former it girl of literary genre fiction. In my classes, I like to describe these stories as: “A man and a woman buy dishes at the store. When they get home, she goes to lie down, barely talking, something unsettling her. A dog barks in the distance. The man starts to put the plates away, and one breaks. The end.” What I love about this kind of narrative is that it’s often deliciously readable. How is that possible? Of course, this kind of narrative is a bit out of vogue — there’s a new it girl on the scene. It’s the same man and woman, but now time travel or zombies or tiny people who live in walnuts are involved. Raymond Carver is to blame for the popularity of the first kind of narrative, with his profound stories of small actions, uninterested as they are in directly exploring the inner lives of characters. That genius George Saunders is to blame for the latter: damn him and his faxing cave man! I have certainly missed other tropes of this rich and admired genre. Feel free to add more in the comments — I need some tips for my next story. (I’m thinking of making it about a woman named Edan Lepucki. Woh…woh…mind melt!)

Fine Arts Student of the Week: Writing is like therapy for junior 
Memorable fine arts achievement: "Drawings and random stories I've done and collected over the years.". Artist most admired: Vincent van Gogh Other fine arts activities: Graphic design and theater. What do you like about writing: "This is my first writing class. I took it because I really love writing stories and so I thought this would be a really interesting class. Plus people have told me I am pretty good at writing." ---   ---   ---   ---   --- Sage Martinson Grade: Junior Age: 16. Art focus: Brainerd High School Creative Writing. ---   ---   ---   ---   --- What do you like to write about: "I like to write about sci-fi or fantasy-sci type stories, usually on the darker side of things like monsters. I also like writing about things similar to Edgar Allan Poe, as some of my writings deal with mental illnesses. I mostly use my writing as a processing thing for me. Writing about (an issue or struggle) helps me feel better, it's like my own personal therapist. "I have written a mixture of things, of topics in general and of things I'm struggling with, but I don't share the personal things. Things I write about myself are written more like a person would write in a journal. I wrote a lot of stories, like I wrote a big one on PTSD (post traumatic stress disorder), and another one ... on psychological/half monsters. My writing is a bit darker as people would see me as. Strong skill in writing: "Description. I'm good as describing imagery and getting readers deep into the story." Weakest skill in writing: "Following through with ideas. I have a lot of ideas, but I don't fully finish them." How do you help others: "I mainly help others with sentence structure and basic punctuation." What are you working on now in creative writing: "A personal narrative. I'm struggling with it a little as I don't like to write about myself for others to read. I'm more of a fiction type story writer." Something you don't like to write: "I don't like to write about myself. Like I said earlier, I don't like sharing my writings as it is like my therapist. I don't want to disclose or share it with others." Dream job: "I'd love to be a famous writer, but the more realistic dream job is an engineer." Favorite subject: "I can't chose, It's close between English, science and math." Favorite movie: "Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy." Favorite TV show: "Arrested Development." Favorite book: "Eragon." Favorite song: "Can't Take My Eyes Off You" by Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons. Favorite band: Gorillaz or Ghost. Clubs: Robotics. Perfect meal: Surf and turf. Biggest pet peeve: "When people talk over me and interrupt. I don't feel like saying what I was talking about again." Random fact about you: "I love swimming and snorkeling. I have a personal snorkeling set. I love it." Parents: Heather Klein of Brainerd and the late Shawn Martinson.

What colonial writing about Indian birds reveals about the British Raj 
On the cusp of the 19th and 20th centuries – the heyday of the British Raj – EH Aitken, the well-known Anglo-Indian writer of natural history, made an alluring statement in his book The Naturalist on the Prowl. In a seemingly casual manner, he writes: You may live in the same garden with a little bird and meet it many times a day, and never know that it is married and has a family. It sounds like a secret being revealed but Aitkins takes the narrative further: For weeks the courtship went on under your windows, till she accepted him and left his rival to look for another love. Then the young couple explored every tree in the garden for suitable premises. One branch was tried and rejected on account of the ants, another was fixed on but spoiled next day by the pruning knife of the Malee. At length a cosy little site was found close by the path which you would traverse everyday, materials were collected and for many days the birds were busy from early morning building their house. Then one happy day they sat, with mutual congratulations and endearments, admiring the first-born egg. There had never been such an egg. It was the darlingest little egg in all the world. For a fortnight after this he led a bachelor life, coming often, however, to see how she did, once a day... While the British left an indelible mark on science and technology developments in their colonies, it cannot be denied that the driving force behind these efforts were commerce and exploitation. However, a look at old natural history writings published during British rule reveals not only glimpses into colonial attitudes but also amusing tales of encounters between the east and west. Because birds are such engaging creatures, diurnal in their habits, the writings on Indian birds particularly stand out and occupy a pride of place. EH AitkenA long history I first became interested in British natural history writings while collecting material for my book Birds of India: A Literary Anthology for which I examined Indian bird writings from different historical periods. Of course, records of natural history existed in India much prior to the arrival of Europeans. There are in fact several such mentions, for instance, in writings in Sanskrit and Pali dating back several thousand years. Some of these are available in translation, such as in the excellent book Birds in Sanskrit Literature by KN Dave. Another set of works, from a later period, is observations made by the Mughal emperors Babur and Jahangir on birds and animals. While the writings from ancient India usually amalgamated mythology and folklore along with biodiversity information, those from the Mughal period, though rich in their descriptions, usually stemmed from an interest in game hunting (shikar) or exhibiting birds and animals in royal menageries. The natural history writings by Europeans are different from these earlier works on chiefly two accounts. Firstly, they are more detailed and specific, recording information in a disciplined and organised manner compared to the Indian works preceding them. A case in point is “presence/absence” data on bird species from specific localities and attempts to correlate such information with features of landscape, vegetation, climate etc. Birdwatchers today call them “checklists”. Depictions and descriptions of birds in Mughal writings and art were mostly focused on shikar or menageries. Secondly, when compared to the Mughal writings, which were the memoirs of monarchs recorded by court historians (such as the Baburnama and Jahangirnama), those by British naturalists were more egalitarian and in a sense directly related to the common man’s perspective. This can be stated unequivocally because among the Raj era naturalists we find writings by common people –administrative officers, soldiers, policemen, lawyers, doctors etc, all “servants of the empire”, besides explorers and scientists. While all of them, aligned to the ruling power directly or indirectly were regarded as “rulers” by native residents, they were in fact mostly not members of British royalty. The home garden It is noteworthy that detailed works on Indian birds by British authors are almost all dated after the revolt of 1857. Among the most significant of these early treatises was Birds of India by Thomas Caverhill Jerdon (1811–1872), a surgeon in the East India Company (EIC). It may be safe to assume that the period after 1857, when the control of Indian colonies was transferred from the EIC to the British Crown, was a relatively settled period for British colonists, often with domestic values coming to the fore. While most British officers could not afford to bring their families from England in the days of “Company Raj”, due to an unsettled life, disease and career uncertainty, now came career civil servants and also, British women, some of them looking for husbands. The title page of TC Jerdon’s treatise, ‘The Birds of India’. After the transfer of power, life was all about living in civil lines or cantonments with structures such as the church, club, and bungalow, with home gardens situated within the compound. Not surprisingly therefore, quite a few books on birds focus on gardens, something that is reflected in their titles. I can quickly recollect three – Birds of an Indian Garden by Fletcher and Inglis, Birds in the Garden in the Low Country Wet-Zone of Ceylon by Felsinger and Garden &amp; Aviary Birds of India by Finn. The ornithological books of that period make it clear that to watch birds, one did not always have to venture into remote areas of wilderness. There was plenty of birdlife in the home garden, only if one cared to look. This is evident from the title of books such as DD Cunningham’s, published in 1903: Some Indian Friends and Acquaintances: A Study of the Ways of Birds and Other Animals Frequenting Indian Streets and Gardens Illustration from EH Aitken's 'Concerning Animals and Other Matters' Interestingly, even in post-Independence India, the fascination for watching birds in the home garden continued. For instance, the High Commissioner of Britain to India in the 1960’s, Sir Malcolm MacDonald, who was an avid birdwatcher and did much of this cherished activity in his home garden in New Delhi, wrote the book, Birds in My Indian Garden in which he described common garden birds in his official residence. Gardening, it turns out, was an absorbing pastime for many expatriates or those who considered themselves living “in exile”. Perhaps in an atmosphere where keeping aloof from local residents was the norm, gardens and flower beds helped in distancing oneself from them and also from the “heat and dust” of India, an aspect touched upon in a recent book, Flora’s Empire: British Gardens in India by EW Herbert. Jim Corbett's bungalow in Kaladhungi presents the image of a typical English bungalow with lawns, hedges and trees More often than not, one encountered captivating scenes in the day-to-day life of common garden birds, which perceptive writers like Douglas Dewar, EH Aitkens and others described in their characteristic style. Many writers skilfully embedded their experiences of common Indian birds and animals in the landscape of colonial settlements. Here, warblers, like Darzee, the tailor bird, lived in the garden hedge; the Indian magpie-robin sang its territorial song perched on the gate leading to a lawn; and the Coppersmith Barbet making it’s tonk tonk tonk sound from an unseen spot in the trees could be heard “knocking” all day, as in Rudyard Kipling’s story “Riki Tikki Tawi”, which is about high drama in a home garden. We also get to learn something about the interiors of British dwellings – “rafters” where bulbuls built nests, or a rolled-up “chick” (reed mat) or the cups of ceiling fans where sparrows made their untidy homes. Meanwhile, writers like Aitkens symbolised an attitude that was somewhat typical of the British naturalist. In a caricature published in the Journal of Bombay Natural History Society – the society of which he was one of the founders, he is depicted as a wiry Jack Sprat figure, with a hat, binoculars, a butterfly net, gun and a backpack. In his writings he weaves a narrative that is scientifically accurate and based on careful observation and reasoning, yet peppered with amusing anecdotes. For instance, describing the habitat of a babbler – heaps of fallen leaves in a garden – he discovers them to be peopled by “sharpers, pickpockets and cut-throats”, all somewhat Dickensian characters likely to be found in the heart of Victorian-age London. EH Aitkens represented an image of the typical British naturalist, made famous in a sketch by Sterndale: a Jack Sprat figure wearing a hat, a butterfly net and binoculars in hand, and possibly a tiffin in the backpack. (Source: Bombay Natural History Society)Going cuckoo The hallmark of British writers was covering each species separately, combining astute observations about their behaviour and bringing to the fore the comparative approach. In their description of the hawk-cuckoo, TB Fletcher and CM Inglis, writing in their book Birds of an Indian Garden, published in 1936 provide a good example of this approach: The common name “Hawk-Cuckoo” conveys a good description of this bird, as it is really a Cuckoo which looks very like a hawk. It is about the size of a Myna, but with a longer tail, greyish brown in colour, whitish beneath, the breast tinged with pink, each feather with darker cross-bars, eyes and legs brilliant yellow. When on the wing, it looks very much like a small hawk but, when it alights, it at once assumes a slouching, cuckoo-like attitude, with the wings dropped forward, so as to touch the perch and the tail slightly raised and expanded, thus presenting an aspect very different from the compact and alert look of a hawk. Seen thus, at rest, this bird can hardly be mistaken for a true hawk, as it has the furtive, peering ways of common Cuckoos, constantly jerking itself from side to side and puffing out its throat. The cuckoos of India especially seemed to fascinate these writers. “Brood parasitism” or the habit of relying on other birds to raise their young, from which the term and myth “cuckoldry” arose is a case in point. It exercised their imagination like no other and indeed, a wholly ornithological work called Cuckoo Problems came to be written on this dreadful subject by ECS Baker. In the bird-related literature of those times we also find examples of the adage, “The east is east and the west is west. The twain shall never meet”. Again, descriptions of Indian cuckoos are illustrative. While these noisy birds symbolised the arrival of the monsoon and rejoicing for Indians, the high-pitched screams of certain species, the hawk-cuckoo particularly, were found to be highly irritating to British naturalists, as the following passage, again from Fletcher and Inglis reveals: The appearance of the Hawk-Cuckoo is probably less familiar to most people than it’s note, which has aptly earned for it the notorious title of the “Brain-fever Bird”. Our Indian gardens and groves contain many sweet voiced singers amongst their avian denizens and a few whose voices are less grateful to the ear, but there is not one whose notes consist of such ear-splitting and nerve racking cries as do those of the Brain-fever Bird. With the most annoying persistence and reiteration this bird repeats its cry, which bears a remarkable resemblance to the word “brain-fever” repeated in a piercing shriek running up the scale. The cry may also be written as “Pipiha” and in some districts the vernacular name of the bird is given as Pupiya. Another rendering of the call, which includes the overture preceding the triple note, is, “O lor’!’O lor’! how very hot it’s getting — we feel it, we feel it, WE FEEL IT”. The driving force behind natural history studies and the development of subjects like botany (and to a lesser extent zoology) was largely commercial motives. Though some works were undertaken to promote agricultural ornithology (one of them being Mason and Lefroy’s book on food of birds), for most part, interest in birds remained within the realm of sport, recreation and enjoying nature. It is in this context that the writings on birds during this period are a sheer pleasure to read, remarkably lucid and stylistic and full of remarkable insights. Abdul Jamil Urfi is Associate Professor at the Department of Environmental Studies, University of Delhi. He edited Birds of India: A Literary Anthology, published by OUP India in 2008.

Local author writes family history as historical novel 
Longtime Houma resident Barbara Weaver Schober decided at age 82 that her family's story should be told. Schober, writing under her grandmother's name, Maggie Payne, has written and published a fascinating oral history in the guise of historical fiction in her first book, "Quantum of Riches." Ostensibly a novel, the book is actually the true story of her family as told by her grandmother. Schober said that she used her artistic license to change only the names of the characters and the location of the story. “She was born shortly after the Civil War and grew up during Reconstruction," Schober said. "She lived on a tobacco plantation in Kentucky, and a lot of the stories she told us are in that book. Her plantation life was in Kentucky, and I moved it to south Louisiana.” The Payne family emigrated from Scotland in the 1800s, settling in the Kentucky Territory. Payne was born in Kentucky in 1869, five years after the Civil War. In 2016, her granddaughter began her novel. The story revolves around Sir Thomas Wallace of Scotland, who discovers a French Land Grant, granted to his grandfather prior to the Louisiana Purchase, and passed down to future generations. He sets sail for America and New Orleans. Finding the land described in the land grant, he travels to Washington to lay claim to the land. Wallace decides this will be his family home. The novel tells the generational story of the drama of Wallace's early life, the drama of his travels from Scotland to the nascent United States and his family's sometimes hard and tragic life on the plantation. Schober moved to south Louisiana at age 5, where she finished high school and received bachelor’s degrees in political science and office management. After 45 years of raising her family and work, Schober began oil painting and served on several political boards. She took about two years to write the book, fighting physical pain to get the story out. “I retired in 1996 with arthritis in my hands from typing for 45 years. The only thing I had here in my house to write with was an old typewriter. “I’m 84 years old, what can I say? I’m old, OK?” Schober is not done writing, however. She said that she is working on a new book, this one a completely fictional novel but still in the historical genre, with the working title "The Admiral and the President." “The admiral is from a ranch in Texas, although he was born in Ohio, and he is called to duty when the Civil War starts," Schober said. "The president, of course, is Lincoln.” Happily, this one should be physically easier to write. Schrober said she has ditched the old manual typewriter for more modern technology. “I got me a computer and a printer," she said. "What I discovered is that I could look up a lot about the Union Navy. It’s a marvelous thing, I can put a word in search and here comes all this information about the ships and everything.” "Quantum of Riches," published by Rose Dog Books, is available on amazon.com.


?Reading Fiction Leads to Good Strategic Thinking 
Sometimes academics say the darndest things. To wit: I recently got in an exchange with a colleague about the upsides and downsides of applying fiction as a catalyst for strategic thought. My interlocutor dismissed the idea out of hand, insisting this represents an unserious endeavor for any serious scholar or think tank analyst. I say you take your insight where you find it. You may find it in a tome about history, political science or economics. Oftentimes you do. But it could also burst forth from a novel, short story or even poem. Homer has more to say about war, strategy and the human condition than most of us do. Which is why new editions of the Iliad and Odyssey debut at a regular clip three millennia later. You have to be cautious with historical fiction for sure. “Counterfactual” history involves changing one variable in some past set of circumstances—preferably one that could have plausibly been different—and extrapolating how changing it would have amended history. There does have to be some realism to the choice of variable and to the modification the author makes to it. Good counterfactual: what if imperial Japan’s military rulers had rejected Adm. Isoroku Yamamoto’s plan to attack Pearl Harbor and the attack never took place? This is reasonable alt-history. Probing it helps illuminate enduring truths about diplomacy, the rise and fall of nations, strategy and high-seas war. Bad counterfactual: what if Gen. Robert E. Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia lay hands on a shipment of AK-47s during the thick of the fighting in 1864? Such a scenario can make for a rollicking good read . But chances are readers will learn little from such fanciful tales in the course of being entertained. Some care is required with science fiction as well, although looking ahead constitutes more of a free-range undertaking than looking back. Whimsical sci-fi can teach. There is a reason the U.S. Marine Corps features the Orson Scott Card novel Ender’s Game on its professional reading list alongside weightier treatises about amphibious warfare and the like. Ender’s Game is only superficially about space combat. In reality it’s about the importance of mental and physical dexterity amid changing tactical and operational surroundings. These are virtues the Marine Corps tries to instill in officers and enlisted folk. You take your insight where you find it. More realistic science fiction projects trends already evident today into the foreseeable future, forecasts the impact of those trends, and often recommends how to avoid a dark future and reach the sunny uplands that await if readers embrace the writer’s sage counsel. This is future history with a purpose. In that vein, both the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps include the novel Ghost Fleet on their professional reading lists. Back in October, I attended a lunchtime talk about “FICINT” given by August Cole, one of the Ghost Fleet coauthors. FICINT, or “fiction intelligence,” is Cole’s neologism for the use of fiction as a catalyst for imaginative thought. Cole and coauthor P. W. Singer study military technology and developments for a living and posit the question: what would happen in a future U.S.-China Pacific war should present trends in strategy, doctrine and force structure continue for a few more years? Their answer is bleak, but the dystopian future they prophesy is far from irredeemable. No spoilers will be found here. Could-be history is a mode of inquiry that compels you to think. Helping people think is what writing is all about. And then there’s Capt. Dale Rielage’s prize-winning essay “How We Lost the Great Pacific War,” which appeared in the U.S. Naval Institute’s Proceedings last May. It falls squarely in the Ghost Fleet genre of future history. The author warns about the repercussions should the U.S. Navy fail to remake an institutional culture grown used to tranquil times for new—more forbidding—realities. It’s a clever piece of work and well worth your time. By setting the narrative in 2025, now-retired Captain Rielage gets to critique present-day U.S. Navy practices without ruffling too many feathers among navy chieftains. The essay takes the form of a mea culpa from a U.S. Pacific Fleet commander who presided over defeat in the Western Pacific. Think of it as a missive from a latter-day Adm. Husband Kimmel, the Pacific Fleet commander on December 7, 1941—or perhaps from Adm. Chester Nimitz had America lost its war against Japan. “Admiral W. T. Door” ascribes the disaster—presumably at Chinese hands—to the cultural malaise that came to permeate the service after the Cold War. Winning too big against a hardy peer competitor is a mixed blessing. Permissive surroundings let an institution fall into bad habits. For instance, “ just in time ” thinking can take hold. If no peer foe looms just beyond the horizon, why stockpile spare parts or armaments, and why assign excess manpower to ship crews to hedge against battle losses? Like manufacturers, the thinking goes, the U.S. Navy can squeeze out waste and maximize efficiency. Just-in-time thinking is just fine until you get in a fight—at which point it swiftly passes its sell-by date. Navies need a surplus of most everything in wartime. Trouble lurks when a fleet sails into harm’s way without it. The basic insight that war costs lives and resources in bulk gets lost during good times, when efficiency tends to become a cult. Myopia toward the nature of martial strife makes the transition back to great-power strategic competition more wrenching than it might otherwise be. Built-up bureaucratic and cultural inertia weighs against efforts to adapt to the new, old reality of naval war. Rielage’s essay sounds a cogent warning against complacency. Now, I do disagree with some of his fortune telling. For instance, he takes the U.S. Navy to task for failing to resurrect the “Asiatic Fleet” model for its forward deployment in Japan. A century ago the U.S. Asiatic Fleet was a force of misfit warships able to show the flag and do little else. The model worked then but wouldn’t now. The Asiatic Fleet was a diplomatic force more than a fighting force—hence its dismal fate in 1942, when the Imperial Japanese Navy put paid to it. But the chief tasks assigned to the fleet were defending the Philippine Islands and keeping open access to China. Today’s U.S. Seventh Fleet, the Asiatic Fleet’s successor, cements America’s alliance with Japan. This is a mission of utmost gravity. The Philippines were U.S. territory back then and had to make do with whatever military resources Washington cared to assign. Today Japan is the United States’ principal ally in the Far East—and the United States has no strategic position in the region without the alliance. Scaling back the Seventh Fleet to a neo-Asiatic Fleet would put Tokyo on notice that America is cutting and running. In short, such a move would loosen relationships on which U.S. Asia policy is founded. Japan would make its peace with Chinese dominance, to the alliance’s detriment. Rielage’s prescription—bring home heavyweight forces to refit and experiment for a Pacific war—makes perfect sense in a material and operational sense. The politics could spell disaster. But see there? This is useful insight drawn from a short story. Agreement isn’t the point of ventures like Rielage’s, Singer’s and Cole’s. Fiction cannot predict the future any more than social science can. Setting intellectual ferment in motion is the point. Taken in that spirit, well-crafted storytelling can enlighten and disturb at the same time it entertains.


?Longmeadow author Linda Cardillo publishes historical fiction book about Michaelangelo, poet Colonna 
LONGMEADOW - Author Linda Cardillo has published her ninth work of fiction, "Love That Moves the Sun," to critical acclaim. Published by Bellastoria Press, the work  of historical fiction is about the life of Vittoria Colonna - one of the most celebrated poets of the Italian Renaissance - and her relationship with the artist Michaelangelo. Cardillo will read from her work and sign books in a program on Dec. 19 at 6:30 at the Storrs Library, 693 Longmeadow St. Registration is requested online, longmeadowlibrary.org, or by calling the library, 413-565-4181. Kirkus Reviews calls the book "a sweeping historical epic and a sensitively observed exploration of the passionate friendship between Colonna and Michaelangelo ...... While Colonna and Michaelangelo's friendship forms the emotional center of the novel, the poet's story and her journey as a woman and a writer are dynamic and multilayered." Judith Arnold, USA Today bestselling author, said "Love That Moves the Sun grabbed hold of me and never let go." Despite having written eight previous works of fiction, Cardillo says this book marks a watershed moment. "I've never tackled a project of this magnitude and complexity," she said, "involving so much research about a period unknown to me. But I loved it. I will write more fiction set in the Renaissance." Through her research, she was struck by how many women in history have been ignored, and she realized something she could do as a writer is bring their stories to life. But the project didn't happen overnight. In 2010, with four published books behind her, Cardillo's agent pointed out that all her books had elements of historical fiction in them. She suggested tackling a truly historical novel. "Being of Italian descent, I wanted to write about Italian history, and what better period to delve into than the Renaissance," she said. She made the decision to find a woman artist of that period to write about. The National Museum of Women in the Arts in Washington, D.C., had run a exhibition of Italian women artists three years previously. Cardillo obtained the catalog from that exhibit and found the biographies in it a treasure trove. A scholarly article in the catalog about female patrons of the arts included among them Vittoria Colonna, a power in her day. "I thought, 'let me see who this woman is'," Cardillo said. "It was the seed that started the journey." Her research took her to the stacks of the library at Mount Holyoke College where she found a 19th century biography of Colonna and articles analyzing her poetry. She contacted a professor at the University of Hartford who was very helpful. She enlisted the aid of the librarians at Storrs Library in Longmeadow who assisted her in gaining access to obscure articles and other relevant materials. "I also needed to know about the setting of the Renaissance period, the food, the dress, wars that were happening," Cardillo said. In all, her research took three years, and, during that time, she made two trips to Italy where, she said, "I walked in (Colonna's) footsteps and looked out on vistas she saw." She saw the palazzo in Rome where Colonna's family still lives and visited the Colonna chapel in a basilica there. And she discovered, through biographies and letters and poems that Colonna and Michaelangelo exchanged, an ambiguity in their relationship. "It was a gift to me as a writer," Cardillo said. "It gave me the freedom to explore and ultimately define their relationship." After sending the book to her agent, she wrote three other books while waiting to see if "Love That Moves the Sun" would be picked up. Eventually, she took the book back from her agent and gave it to an editor she trusted. The editor spent several months with it and recommended Cardillo rethink the structure. "That was a powerful breakthrough," she said. Two years of revisions followed, and the book was released on Dec. 1. The cover portrait of Vittoria Colonna is the work of young Springfield artist Eliza Moser who Cardillo chose after seeing a local exhibit of her paintings. "Her evocative paintings spoke to me," Cardillo said. "Love That Moves the Sun" is now available for purchase from Bellastoria Press, Amazon, and Barnes and Noble. For more information about the author and other readings, visit the author's website, lindacardillo.com.

